Once around Pism 24-1.
So this story starts with the Pismiss
catalog compiled by astronomer Paris
Pism uh who was alive from 1911 to 1999.
And back in 1959
she created a catalog of star clusters
based at the Tundalzilla Observatory.
These star clusters are marked on the
amazing map to the right there along
with a lot of other features, but
there's only 11 of them there. The total
catalog was uh some thing like double
that. And one of them that's
particularly interesting is Pismus 24.
And that lies in the constellation of
Scorpio, the scorpion marked here. And
you can see the red circle on the
diagram and the inset there of a blowup
of the region.
Now you can see in that photograph that
there's a nebula and the nebula is in
the new general catalog compiled by
Hershel
as number 6357.
And it's called an H2 region. That's uh
standing for ionized hydrogen. So the
hydrogen is ionized by radiation from
hot stars. And then as the electrons
recombine with the ionized nuclei, the
protons, you get a characteristic red
light comes away, giving us a lot of the
nebula with that pink tinge that we see.
And these are often star forming
regions. All of the gas and the dust
collapsing to form generations of new
stars. And it's no different here. You
can see the hot bubbles of gas and the
colder, darker brown regions in this
fantastic photograph of this huge gas
cloud. And you can see three purple
regions with embedded young star
clusters. One at the top right and one
in the lower center, one at the left
there. And one of these is the one that
we're interested in. Now, this uh rather
than calling this NGC6357,
a lot of people call this the Lobster
Nebula. Um, which is a much better name
really, isn't it?
So, it's around about somewhere between
5,500
and 8,000 light years away in the Milky
Way.
And I love this photograph here. This
was published but on NASA's astronomy
photography of the day back in 2006
um 20th of December and shows quite a
wide field here with the nebula glowing
uh nicely in that sort of orangey color
and then we have the uh bright star
cluster right in the center there.
That's the one that we're interested in.
So we can drill in a little bit further.
And this image comes from the dark
energy survey camera and shows the
nebula in much greater detail. And again
that bright star cluster just to the
right of the center there. A number of
other bright uh stars, one of which
we'll mention right at the end.
And there's a lot of X-rays coming not
discovered by the dark energy camera,
but the X-rays were detected by the
spacecraft Chandra. And uh that's been
added to uh the image here just to
highlight some of the really hot regions
of gas. You've got a number of point
sources which are young stars that seem
to produce lots of X-rays from material
that's uh getting extremely hot as the
star is accreting more material. and
then diffuse X-rays from a lot of the
gas that's being heated by the intense
stellar winds and by exploding stars.
Giant stars don't live very long. So
even during the formation of other stars
around them, they can go right through
their life cycle and explode as a
supernova.
Here's a further image drilling in a
little bit tighter on the cloud and the
cluster that we're interested in. This
one's taken in visible light uh by the
Danish telescope at Lassilla Observatory
in Chile. And again, you can see the
bright stars right in the center
illuminating the gas. And we can keep on
drilling in. Let's go right into the
cluster area. Pismus 24 is at the top
there. a bright star cluster. And you
can see how the light is coming away
from those hot stars and illuminating
the gas and creating that pillar effect
a bit like the pillars of creation in
the Eagle Nebula Messier 20 made famous
by the amazing photograph that was one
of the early photographs of Hubble. But
you can see it again here. The towers of
gas and dust are ablating at the top
where the high energy radiation is
coming from the super hot stars boiling
the material away but they that's
protecting the deeper regions behind
which are in shadow and so the pillars
are being retained. You can also see the
way the star at the bottom there is
blowing out a huge cave around itself.
So there's a tremendous amount in this
photograph.
Now the cluster at the top, Pismus 24,
that was shown actually to be at least
15 separate components back in 1973 as
technology improved. And that each of
the stars within the cluster was a very
massive star. And the brightest of the
lot is the real subject of our talk
today. And that's called Pismus 24-1.
number one for being the brightest. So,
what's that star like? Well, it was once
thought to be the most massive star ever
discovered. When first modeled based on
its temperature and its brightness
and the distance that we estimated it to
be, it came out at 300 times the mass of
the sun. 300 m. And then that circular
ring with a dot in the middle is the
symbol for the sun. And that's more than
we thought was possible for an
individual star. When stars form, a
whole lot of gas has to collapse down
and get into uh range of being held
together by gravity despite the fact
that nuclear fusion tends to kick off in
the middle. And the more mass there is,
the more violently the nuclear fusion is
going to kick off, the more outward
radiation there is going to be, and that
can blow away material that's trying to
fall in. And there's a calculation for
that called the Edington limit. This is
the maximum power output a star can have
before the radiation pressure is too
high for gravity to be able to allow it
to form. And this is around about 150
solar masses. You can see the formula on
the right there. L ed the Edington limit
for the luminosity
is based on some constants. 4 pi gton's
strength of gravity
and you've got m for the mass of the
star lowerase mp is the mass of a
proton. C is the speed of light and then
we've got sigma t the uh Stephan
Boltzman constant at the bottom there
which talks to the power of radiation
based on temperature and so forth.
So fundamentally you have the mass of
the star and the mass of a proton there
in the equation. And the reason the mass
of the proton turns up is that this is
the formula assuming that your star is
made entirely of hydrogen which of
course they never are. There's always
some helium present in various amounts
around about 25% sometimes a little bit
more sometimes just less. And then you
can lose some of the hydrogen from the
surface and increase the proportion of
helium as the star evolves. You can have
some other elements present etc. And of
course if your star is actually um a
late stage star so a white dwarf or a
neutron star or even a black hole then
the uh equation is somewhat different
and uh generally those can sustain a
much greater power output up to uh
thousand times for a neutron star
something like that. But anyway, around
about 150 solar masses was calculated
for the theoretical upper limit that a
star could possibly have. Now, we seem
to find a number of stars that are more
massive than this. There's R136A,
which is 215 times the mass of the sun.
Seems to break this limit. And it's
probable that they have come about via
merger of two very massive stars,
although we're not absolutely certain.
So there may be a little bit more going
on in the physics, but nevertheless 300,
the initial estimate for PISMs 24-1
seemed outrageous.
Now, it was partially resolved when
better instrumentation allowed a
photograph to reveal that there was a
another star right next door and that
could be separated away from it. This is
not in orbit around 241. This is Pismus
2416, just a close neighbor. And this
too is an a hot Oclass star 07.5. So at
the the cooler end of the O's. Um and
about 38 solar masses we think. So some
of the brightness of uh the original
star was uh as measured was actually
down to this. But there still remains a
problem and that is that the temperature
of the light coming from Pismus 241
doesn't seem to quite match its overall
power output. Um and that is a clue that
we have got something wrong. Um and so
maybe we should look at this again. Now
studies of Pism 241 revealed that the
brightness oscillates going up and down
by about half a magnitude in a period
reliably 2.36 days. And this sort of
light curve that we see on the right
here is a classic indication that what
we have is an eclipsing binary.
Two stars orbiting around each other and
they periodically pass across our line
of sight. So we can only see one of them
and we alternate between which one we
can see and which one is in eclipse
behind
the period and the equal nature of the
dips in the light suggests that these
are two nearly identical stars in a
pretty much circular orbit. And uh in
fact this was sufficiently compelling
that the Hubble Space Telescope was
tasked to go and have a look and it was
able to take this amazing photograph
zooming in on the cluster on the left
and then on the brightest of the stars
there which it revealed to be a double.
So there are two visual components and
these are designated BIS business 241NE
and business 241SW
for northeast and southwest in the uh
directions that you can see in the image
there and that's uh amazing what Hubble
Space Telescope was able to do. So if we
look at those two individually, what we
found was that the brighter one
NE the northeast component this is
hotter and brighter than its companion
and turned out itself to be a double.
The spectrum of the light showed that it
was a binary system. We can't resolve it
into two, but you can see the spectral
lines splitting and combining in a
pattern indicating a pair of stars
orbiting around each other very closely.
And that's caused by the Doppler shift
as the stars are moving towards or away
from us. So here we've got a temperature
reading 42,000 Kelvin and a total power
output of 800,000 times the uh uh power
of soul or the sun. And that tells us
that we've got around about 80 solar
masses each for the two components of
the the binary. That explains why we're
seeing the mismatch between the power
output and the the temperature in
conjunction with the fact that we've got
two stars here each of 80 solar masses.
And we've got Pismus 241SW,
the southwest component, which is
another very slightly cooler star,
40,000 instead of 42,000 and a little
bit less powerful, 650,000
times the power of our sun. Um, and the
spectrum of this has been studied and
shows nice lines of helium, nitrogen,
and silicon. No hydrogen. It's blown
most of the hydrogen off from the outer
layers. So tremendous is that radiation
pressure essentially the Edington limit
at play there. So this one's about 60
solar masses. So in fact all three of
these components are now neatly
underneath that uh Edington limit of 150
and this problem is resolved. But in
total you had 80 plus 80 plus another
60. So uh you were blowing through the
uh the limit before but they turned out
to be at least three separate
components. There may be more. Um we
just don't have the resolving power to
see if there are any smaller closer
companions.
And while we're on the subject of super
massive stars in this particular part of
the sky, if we go back to NGC6357,
just to the right of it, you can see the
label HD157504
from the Henry Draper catalog there. And
this also goes by the designation WR93
because this is a Wolf Ray star. This is
truly massive indeed. This actually is
120 solar masses with the enormous
temperature 71,000 Kelvin. And it's
given a class above O in terms of
temperature, the W class for Wolf Ray
and C for carbon. And it's a WC7 star.
So no hydrogen at all. All the hydrogen
that was there has been blown into space
by that radiation pressure. So this
would have been even more massive when
it formed and first kicked off the
nuclear fusion process perhaps pushing
up towards that 150 solar mass limit.
In the spectrum we see ionized carbon
and oxygen and that is always a clue.
That's where the C from the WC
classification comes from. And what it's
telling us is that carbon is the
dominant line and in particular that the
carbon 3 line is less than the carbon 4
line for triply ionized carbon atoms and
that both of those are exceeding the
line from oxygen the 05 line which is
quadruply ionized oxygen atoms. So, the
temperature ripping the electrons away
at this enormous 71,000 Kelvin.
So, I'll talk more about Wolf Ray stars
in a future video. Keep your eyes peeled
for that. Uh, but for the moment, I'll
leave you with this magnificent
photograph of the uh Lobster Nebula with
the three amazing star clusters and many
hundreds of massive stars. So, thanks
very much for listening and we'll be
back with another one later.